1.31 announcement (#295)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: _posts/2018-12-06.Rust-1.31.md

---
layout: post

> title: "Announcing Rust 1.31"

Reviewer: We had talked in the core team about more clearly distinguishing this from a normal announcement.

Maybe "Announcing Rust 2018 (1.31)" or some such?

Author: I've made a tweak, let me know if you want a further one

author: The Rust Core Team
---

> The Rust team is happy to announce a new version of Rust, 1.31.0. Rust is a

Reviewer 2: I think we should have 2018 edition in the first sentence - anything else feels like burying the lede

> The Rust team is happy to announce a new version of Rust, 1.31.0. Rust is a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Rust team is happy to announce the *first* version of Rust edition 2018 and a new version of Rust, 1.31.0. Rust is a
```
Maybe add a forward link as well under "Rust edition 2018"

> systems programming language focused on safety, speed, and concurrency.

Reviewer: TODO: update this with wherever we land on the slogan (on the new site)

If you have a previous version of Rust installed via rustup, getting Rust
1.31.0 is as easy as:

```bash
$ rustup update stable
```

If you don't have it already, you can [get `rustup`][install] from the
appropriate page on our website, and check out the [detailed release notes for
1.31.0][notes] on GitHub.

[install]: https://www.rust-lang.org/install.html
[notes]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/RELEASES.md#version-1310-2018-12-06

## What's in 1.31.0 stable

Rust 1.31 may be the most exciting release since Rust 1.0! Included in this release is the

> first iteration of "Rust 2018," but there's more than just that! This is going to be a long

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
first iteration of "Rust 2018", but there's more than just that! This is going to be a long
```

Reviewer 4: @Centril It's horrible yeah... I guess if we're going to be consistent though...

post, so here's a table of contents:

* [Rust 2018](#rust-2018)
  * [Non-lexical lifetimes](#non-lexical-lifetimes)
  * [Module system changes](#module-system-changes)
* [More lifetime elision rules](#more-lifetime-elision-rules)
* [`const fn`](#const-fn)

> * [Tool Lints](#tool-lints)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [New tools](#new-tools)
* [Tool Lints](#tool-lints)
```

* [Library stabilizations](#library-stabilizations)
* [Cargo features](#cargo-features)

> * [Contributors](#contributors-to-1310)

Reviewer 2: Lots of tools stuff too - I'll send some text

### Rust 2018

We wrote about Rust 2018 [first in
March](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2018/03/12/roadmap.html), [and then in
July](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2018/07/27/what-is-rust-2018.html).
For some more background about the *why* of Rust 2018, please go read those
posts; there's a lot to cover in the release announcement, and so we're going

> to focus on the *what* here.

Reviewer: TODO: link to Lin's post here, for a graphic explainer of what Rust 2018 is all about.

Let's create a new project with Cargo:

```console
$ cargo new foo
```

Here's the contents of `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[package]
name = "foo"
version = "0.1.0"
authors = ["Your Name <you@example.com>"]
edition = "2018"

[dependencies]
```

> A new key has been added under `[package]`: `edition`. You'll note it's been

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A new key has been added under `[package]`: `edition`. Note that it has been
```
Reduce repetition (You used twice in succession)

set to `2018`. You can also set it to `2015`, which is the default if the key
does not exist.

> By using Rust 2018, you unlock some new features that are not allowed in Rust 2015.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By using Rust 2018, some new features are unlocked that are not allowed in Rust 2015.
```
Use the word "you" *a bit* less. :)

> And eventually, we'll be turning on some new warnings that help you use these

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And eventually, we'll be turning on some new warnings (*"idiom lints"*) that help you use these
```

Author: sure

new features more effectively, as well.

> But it's important to note that each package you use can be in either 2015 or

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is important to note that each packag can be in either 2015 or
```
The connection to the previous paragraph didn't feel that immediate to have "But ..." imo.

we don't split the ecosystem, and all of these new things are opt-in,
preserving compatibility for existing code. Furthermore, when you do choose
to migrate Rust 2015 code to Rust 2018, the changes can be made
automatically, via `cargo fix`.

What kind of new features, you may ask? Well, first, features get added to
Rust 2015 unless they require some sort of incompatibility with 2015's
features. As such, most of the language is available everywhere. You can
check out [the edition
guide](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/edition-guide) to check each
feature's minimum `rustc` version as well as edition requirements. However,
there are a few big-ticket features we'd like to mention here: non-lexical
lifetimes, and some module system improvements.

#### Non-lexical lifetimes

If you've been following Rust's development over the past few years, you may
have heard the term "NLL" or "non-lexical lifetimes" thrown around. This is
jargon, but it has a straightforward translation into simpler terms: the
borrow checker has gotten smarter, and now accepts some valid code that it
previously rejected. Consider this example:

```rust

> fn main() {

Reviewer: I wonder if we should use, or at least mention, a more real example? Maybe we should just leave it for @nikomatsakis's post, though.

Reviewer 5: A "mutate the original variable at the end of a `match`" example might be good. IMO That's one of the biggest pain points. Perhaps this example from the RFC?

```
fn process_or_default() {
    let mut map = ...;
    let key = ...;
    match map.get_mut(&key) { // -------------+ 'lifetime
        Some(value) => process(value),     // |
        None => {                          // |
            map.insert(key, V::default()); // |
            //  ^~~~~~ ERROR.              // |
        }                                  // |
    } // <------------------------------------+
}
```

Author: I'd like to stick to the simple example for now, unless we feel *really* strongly about it. There's a lot in this post already, and keeping it straightforward is more important than being hyper realistic, I think.

If people feel super strongly I'm willing to change it though.

Author: I did link to the edition guide, which has the full details of everything; maybe we need another one?

not handle it.

Today, this code will compile just fine.

What if we did use `y`, like this for example:

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut x = 5;
    let y = &x;
    let z = &mut x;
    
    println!("y: {}", y);
}
```

Older Rust will give you this error:

```text
rror[E0502]: cannot borrow `x` as mutable because it is also borrowed as immutable
 --> src/main.rs:5:18
  |
4 |     let y = &x;
  |              - immutable borrow occurs here
5 |     let z = &mut x;
  |                  ^ mutable borrow occurs here
...
8 | }
  | - immutable borrow ends here
```

With Rust 2018, this error changes for the better:

```text
error[E0502]: cannot borrow `x` as mutable because it is also borrowed as immutable
 --> src/main.rs:5:13
  |
4 |     let y = &x;
  |             -- immutable borrow occurs here
5 |     let z = &mut x;
  |             ^^^^^^ mutable borrow occurs here
6 |     
7 |     println!("y: {}", y);
  |                       - borrow later used here
```

Instead of pointing to where `y` goes out of scope, it shows you where the
conflicting borrow occurs. This makes these sorts of errors far easier to
debug.

> In Rust 1.31, this feature is exclusive to Rust 2018. We hope to backport it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Rust 1.31, this feature is exclusive to Rust 2018. We plan to backport it
```

to Rust 2015 at a later date.

#### Module system changes

> The module system is often one of the hardest things for people new to Rust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The module system can be a struggle for people first learning Rust.
```

Everyone has their own things that take time to master, of course, but
there's a root cause for why it's so confusing to many: while there are
simple and consistent rules defining the module system, their consequences
can feel inconsistent, counterintuitive and mysterious.

As such, the 2018 edition of Rust introduces a few new module system

> features, but they end up simplifying the module system, to make it more

Reviewer: We might consider framing the path changes not so much as a new feature as a change to how paths work.

clear as to what is going on.

Here's a brief summary:

> * `extern crate` is no longer needed in 99% of circumstances.

Reviewer 3: Don't use a % point unless it's actually substantiated imo; rather:
```suggestion
* `extern crate` is no longer needed in almost all circumstances.
```

* You can import macros with `use`, rather than a `#[macro_use]` attribute.

> * Absolute paths begin with a crate name, where the keyword `crate` refers to the current crate.

Reviewer: Maybe clarify: all paths in `use` statements

Author: I am not 100% sure what you're asking me to tweak.

> * Absolute paths begin with a crate name, where the keyword `crate` refers to the current crate.

Reviewer 3: Do we want to hint at uniform paths given that it is in the pipeline?

Author: I'd like to keep it as straightforward as possible since there's so much in this post.

* A `foo.rs` and `foo/` subdirectory may coexist; `mod.rs` is no longer needed when placing submodules in a subdirectory.

> These may seem like arbitrary new rules when put this way, but the mental

Reviewer: This feels a bit underwhemling. I'm wondering if we can get across a bit more about why this is an improvement. For example, we could talk about how this eliminates the confusion around paths working differently at the top level module vs submodules.

Author: I was worried about the post being too long.... doing that adds a *lot* of length. I agree that it feels underwhelming though...

model is now significantly simplified overall.

There's a *lot* of details here, so please read [the edition
guide](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/edition-guide/rust-2018/module-system/path-clarity.html)
for full details.

### More lifetime elision rules

Let's talk about a feature that's available in both editions: we've added
some additional elision rules for `impl` blocks and function definitions.
Code like this:

```rust
impl<'a> Reader for BufReader<'a> {
    // methods go here
}

> `

Reviewer 6: There're 2 missing backticks 👀

```diff
- `
+ ```
```

can now be written like this:

```rust
impl Reader for BufReader<'_> {
    // methods go here
}
```

The `'_` lifetime still shows that `BufReader` takes a parameter, but we
don't need to create a name for it anymore.

Lifetimes are still required to be defined in structs. We're considering
some options here in the future, but have no concrete plans yet.

### `const fn`

There's several ways to define a function in Rust: a regular function with
`fn`, an unsafe function with `unsafe fn`, an external function with `extern fn`.
This release adds a new way to qualify a function: `const fn`. It looks like
this:

```rust
const fn foo(x: i32) -> i32 {
    x + 1
}
```

A `const fn` can be called like a regular function, but it can also be used
in any constant context. When it is, it is evaluated at compile time, rather
than at run time. As an example:

```rust
const SIX: i32 = foo(5);
```

This will execute `foo` at compile time, and set `SIX` to `6`.

`const fn`s cannot do everything that normal `fn`s can do; they must
have deterministic output. This is important for soundness reasons.

> Currently, `const fn`s can do a minimal subset of operations. Here's

Reviewer: cc @eddyb @centril

Reviewer 3: Looks accurate / what we said in the tracking issue / reference;
Are you looking for something specific?
cc @oli-obk

some examples of what you can do:

* Arithmetic and comparison operators on integers
* All boolean operators except for `&&` and `||`
* Constructing arrays, structs, enums, and tuples
* Calls to other `const fn`s
* Index expressions on arrays and slices
* Field accesses on structs and tuples
* Reading from constants (but not statics, not even taking a reference to a static)
* `&` and `*` of references
* Casts, except for raw pointer to integer casts

> We'll be slowly growing the abilities of `const fn`, but we've decided that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We'll be growing the abilities of `const fn`, but we've decided that
```
Actually, we are working on it relatively quickly except for constraints & bounds ;)

> this is enough useful stuff to start shipping the feature itself.

Reviewer 3: Maybe add something like (but reword):

---------------

Examples of restrictions which we are looking to lift near-term include:
- Calling `const unsafe` functions, https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/55607
- Let bindings, https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/48821
- `panic!("...")`s, https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/51999
- Using `loop`s, https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/52000
- `if` and `match`, https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/49146

Author: Yes, we don't do these kinds of things in these posts. It's fine, IMHO.

For full details, please see [the
reference](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/items/functions.html#const-functions).

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The 2018 edition signals a new level of maturity for Rust's tools ecosystem. Cargo, Rustdoc, and Rustup have been crucial tools since 1.0; with the 2018 edition, there is a new generation of tools ready for all users: Clippy, Rustfmt, and IDE support.

--- Clippy (Manish) goes here ---

[Rustfmt](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustfmt) is a tool for formatting Rust code. Automatically formatting your code lets you save time and arguments by using the [official Rust style](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/style-guide/README.md). You can install with `rustup component add rustfmt` and use it with `cargo fmt`.

This release includes Rustfmt 1.0. From now on we guarantee backwards compatibility for Rustfmt: if you can format your code today, then the formatting will not change in the future (only with the default options). Backwards compatibility means that running Rustfmt on your CI is practical (use `cargo fmt --check`). Try that and 'format on save' in your editor to revolutionize your workflow.

IDE support is one of the most requested tooling features for Rust. There are now multiple, high quality options:

* [Visual Studio Code](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=rust-lang.rust)
* [IntelliJ](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/8182-rust)
* [Atom](https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/atom-ide-rust)
* [Sublime Text 3](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-enhanced)
* [Eclipse](https://www.eclipse.org/downloads/packages/release/photon/r/eclipse-ide-rust-developers-includes-incubating-components)

Work on IDE support is not finished, in particular code completion is not up to scratch in the RLS-based editors. However, if you mainly want support for types, documentation, and 'go to def', etc. then you should be happy.
```

Reviewer 7: Stuff for clippy is in https://github.com/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/pull/295#discussion_r239464428 (I can't add a suggestion on a suggestion).

### Tool lints

In [Rust 1.30](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2018/10/25/Rust-1.30.0.html), we
stabilized "tool attributes", like `#[rustfmt::skip]`. In Rust 1.31, we're
stabilizing something similar: "tool lints," like

> `#[allow(clippy::something)]` These give a namespace to lints, so that it's

Reviewer 2: I would use `bool_comparison` here rather than `something`

more clear which tool they're coming from.

If you previously used Clippy's lints, you can migrate like this:

```rust
// old

> #![allow(bool_comparison)]

Reviewer 2: is there an example using cfg_attr we can use? (cc @Manishearth )

Reviewer 7: Yeah, came here to mention this.

The main benefit of `tool_lints` is that you don't have to cfg_attr anymore.

We can suggest something like replacing `#![cfg_attr(clippy, bool_comparison)]` with `#![allow(clippy::bool_comparison)]`.

Note that the tool lints stuff doesn't _just_ replace `cfg_attr(clippy, ...)`, all `allow()` attributes for clippy will be replaced. Not sure if this needs to be mentioned, almost everyone does the cfg_attr thing.

// new
#![allow(clippy::bool_comparison)]
```

You'll get warnings that can help you update to the new style.

### Library stabilizations

A bunch of `From` implementations have been added:

* `u8` now implements `From<NonZeroU8>`, and likewise for the other numeric types and their `NonZero` equivalents
* `Option<&T>` implements `From<&Option<T>>`, and likewise for `&mut`

Additionally, these functions have been stabilized:

* [`slice::align_to`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.slice.html#method.align_to) and its mutable counterpart
* [`slice::chunks_exact`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.slice.html#method.chunks_exact),
  as well as its mutable and `r` counterparts (like
  [`slice::rchunks_exact_mut`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.slice.html#method.rchunks_mut)) in all combinations

See the [detailed release notes][notes] for more.

### Cargo features

> Cargo will now download packages in parallel using HTTP/2. Additionally,

Reviewer 2: We should state how much quicker this is, will follow up...

Author: Do we have these numbers? how reliable are they?

Reviewer 2: I don't think we have the detail. But I think they are reliable (the number is from a GH issue, so it must be true).

> now that `extern crate` is gone, you can't `extern crate foo as bar;` anymore

Reviewer 3: What do we mean by "is gone"?

Reviewer 8: I think a better wording would be "Now that extern crate is no longer completely idiomatic" or something?

Reviewer 5: "Now that `extern crate` is not usually required, it would be jarring to have to use `extern crate foo as bar;` to import crate with a different name."?

to rename a crate. As such, you can do so in your `Cargo.toml`, like this:

```toml
[dependencies]
baz = { version = "0.1", package = "foo" }
```

or, the equivalent

```toml
[dependencies.baz]
version = "0.1"
package = "foo"
```

> Now, the `baz` package will be able to be used via `foo` in your code.

Reviewer 9: This is backward, `foo` would be available as `baz` in the code.

Author: nice catch. that feels backwards to me... oh well

See the [detailed release notes][notes] for more.

## Contributors to 1.31.0

Many people came together to create Rust 1.31. We couldn't have done it

> without all of you. [Thanks!](https://thanks.rust-lang.org/rust/1.31.0)

Reviewer 3: Link doesn't seem to work?

Reviewer 8: Yes, that's expected (we run thanks during release).
